- [Instructor] Let us understand the need for generics.
But before that,
we will have to know a couple of things well,
the first one is recap of a few common terms
that we use in the Java language.
The first term is type.
Type is any class, interface or enumerated datatype.
And this type could be inbuilt,
that is from the Java APIs,
or it could be custom, that is developed by you.
An example of an inbuilt type from the Java APIs
is the class string, the class object,
or even the interfaces, like list, set, map, et cetera.
In your application, if you have a class called product,
that is a type.
If somewhere in your code
you have an interface called Bounceable that you coded,
that is also a type.
The next term is object type reference.
This means that you have a variable
which is of the object type.
Now object as we know is the super class
of all the classes in Java.
So if we write code like this,
object name equal to new object,
this means that we have a variable name
which is of the type object,
so name becomes object type reference.
And then we have instance.
In Java, whenever you create an object of any class
using the new keyboard,
then we say we created an instance of the class,
or alternately, we instantiated the class.
So for example, if you want to create an object
of the ArrayList class,
you would use the new keyword,
followed by the name of the class,
and then a pair of round brackets.
The round bracket signify the construct of call
responsible for object creation process in Java.
Similarly, if you have a class called product
and you want to create an object of that,
you would say new product,
followed by a pair of round brackets,
and you would refer to it by a variable of the product type.
Let's go ahead and understand one more concept
of generalized code.
In Java, one can always write generalized code
using the object oriented programming principles
of inheritance and polymorphism.
This means that if you have a logic
that is implemented for a parent class,
it will be available to all the child classes
extending that parent.
So for example, if we write code like this,
number number equal to new integer,
and in a pair of round brackets, the value 10,
this means that we created an object of the class integer,
and we are referring to it by a variable
which is of the number type.
Now number is a class in Java,
and it is also the parent class of the integer class.
So we can create an object of the sub class
and we can refer to it by a variable of the super class.
So all the implementation that is available
in a number class will be carried ahead
to the integer class.
taking a step further to this,
since we know that object is the super class
of all the other classes in Java,
we can always write generalized code
using object type references as well.
That is because an object type reference
can point to an instance of any class.
So for example, if we write code like this,
object value equal to new string,
and in a pair of round brackets "Java,"
this means that we created an object of the string class,
but we are to it by a variable value,
which is of the object type.
So same thing again,
you're creating instances of child classes,
but you can definitely point to them
by variables of the parent.
Let's write a simple piece of code
in order to understand this better.
Let's go to the IDE,
we are going to use the IntelliJ IDE,
and let's create a fresh project.
So click on the new project button,
and we'll create a Java project, a simple Java project.
We will choose Java 11 version for this course.
We do not want to select any library,
let's just click on next.
We do not want to create the project
from any kind of a template,
so we'll skip option as well and click on next.
And let's give it a name,
let's call it Generics,
and then let's click on finish.
So now the project will open up in a window.
Under this, you have the source folder, the SRC folder,
let's right click on it and create a package first.
So we'll call it com.linkedin.generics.
And on this, I will write a class,
let's call this NonGenericsCode.
Let's write the main method here
so we can test out something quickly.
Inside this main method,
let's create a variable of the list type.
So list is an interface coming from the collections API,
Java.util package.
So let's do that.
And let's name this variable as languages.
Further, let's instantiate this to an ArrayList object.
Now, the list that we created on line number eight
is a non-generics list.
This means, that you can add any type of data to this list.
So you can add string values,
you can add integer values,
or you could even add objects of your product class.
However, all the data that you add in this list
will be treated as the object type.
This list is also ultimately called as a raw list,
or a raw type.
Let's come on the next line and say languages.ad.
And if you look at the method signature of the ad,
then you see that it is asking you to add something
of the object type.
Let's go ahead and add languages,
let's add English first.
On the next line, you could also do something like this,
create a variable of the object type, let's call it value,
and point this to an instance of the string type,
and let's feed in a language to it,
let's name it Swedish.
And then on the next line,
you can say languages.add value.
This is also fine.
This is how basically you go ahead
and write generalized code.
However, this approach of writing generalized code
comes in with a couple of limitations,
and those are the problems
that we are trying to understand without generics.
The first one is, whenever you try to process these values
that have been written with generalized code,
you will need to do an explicit casting.
What does that mean?
Let's go back to the IDE,
and let's write a method call here, say processLanguages,
and let's pass that languages list to it.
This method does not exist as of now,
so we will come out of the main method,
and on line 15, let's write that process language as method.
So we'll say private static.
This method does not need to return anything as of now,
so we will label the written type as void,
and the name of the method,
and a parameter of the type list,
let's call it data.
So we chose a parameter of the type list
because online number 12,
we are passing list as an argument.
When we come inside this method on line 16,
let's try to retrieve the value at the zeroth index
of that data parameter,
and take it into a string variable.
Now, why do we need a string variable?
That is because on line's number nine and 10,
we added values of this string type,
so we know that the list contains string values.
So let's go ahead and take a string variable
and say, language.
And the way you get any value
from any index inside a list is by the get method.
So data.get specify the index number zero in this case.
Unfortunately, this line does not compile.
And the error that you get is,
the required type is string and you provided object.
So, as we said earlier, the list on line number eight
is a raw list,
you can add values of any type.
But anything that you add
will be considered to be of the object type.
So on line 16, when you say data.get zero,
the value that it yields is of the object type,
but we are trying to capture it
into a variable of the string type.
Now this is an incompatible operation,
so the compiler stops you right there and doesn't allow it.
So then what do we do?
A simple solution to this is,
you can cast the data.get zero value to the string type.
And casting is as simple as doing this,
mentioning the type name in a pair of round brackets.
That's all.
So you took data.get zero,
you cast it into the string type,
and now you're okay to capture it into a string variable.
Let's go on the next line
and just print that value to the console.
And let's run this method,
and observe the console output.
Everything should go well,
and we should get the data at the zeroth index,
which is in our case, English.
So there we go.
We did get the English as an output on the console.
So what we did is, whenever we tried to process the values
from that list data, the parameter that you have on line 15,
we had to perform an explicit casting
to the string type on line 16.
So if you do this everywhere in your application,
then you're going to introduce a lot of clutter
in your code, and that's not good.
The second problem with this approach
of writing object type implementation,
is that this code lacks type safety.
What is that?
Let's go back to the IDE,
and on line number nine,
instead of this English string,
I will add a number, let's say 23,
and let's run this code again.
And now let's see what we have on the console.
This time, we get an exception,
class cast exception,
and it says that java.lang.integer
cannot be cast to Java.lang.String.
Hmm, so what happened here?
On line number nine, you added a number,
an in integer, 23 to this list,
and this is totally okay.
Because as we said earlier,
you can add any type of values to that list.
However, when you came inside the process languages method
on line 16, you try to say data.get zero,
and cast that to a string type.
Now, the problem is, that Java detected
that data.get zero is yielding you a number,
and that number cannot be taken inside a string variable,
and that is why it threw the class cast exception
at run time.
But the question here is,
if this is the case,
why was the compilation on line number 16 successful?
That is because, when we cast data.get zero
to a string type, the compiler trusted us.
The compiler assumed that we know what we are doing,
that we were confident enough
to cast that value to a string type.
However, when the code ran,
Java runtime detected
that you were trying to take the integer 23
into a string variable,
and that is why it went ahead and threw that exception.
So this is the problem of type safety.
On line number nine, I just went ahead and added the value
23.
There was no safety ensured
that I'm trying to add the correct thing in that list.
This is the type safety problem
that comes in with the generalized code.
And then you see that the type safety problem
leads you to that class cast exception,
which is a runtime issue,
and that's even more embarrassing for your application.
So, we have two issues:
one is, when you try to process values
with generalized code,
you will need to perform explicit casting.
Second is, when you write such code,
you do not have any kind of type safety guarantee.
To solve these two problems,
we have a very powerful feature in Java which is generics.